well good afternoon everybody thank you
all very much for coming along today I'd
like to begin my talk with a story it's
a story that begins but does not end
where the mathematician named Tim
Gower's Gower's is one of the world's
most renowned mathematicians he's a
professor at Cambridge University and a
recipient of the Fields Medal often
called the Nobel Prize of mathematics
Gower's is also a blogger and in January
of 2009 he used his blog to pose a very
striking question is massively
collaborative mathematics possible so
what he was proposing in this post was
to use his blog to attack a difficult
unsolved mathematical problem a problem
which he said he would love to solve
completely in the open
using his blog to post his ideas and his
partial progress what's more he issued
an open invitation inviting anybody in
the world who thought that they had an
idea to contribute to post their idea in
the comments section of the blog ok his
hope was that by combining the ideas of
many minds he could make easy work of
his hard mathematical problem
he called this experiment the polymath
project
well the polymath project got off to a
slow start in the first seven hours
nobody posted any comments but then a
mathematician from the university of
british columbia named joseph stalin OSI
posted a short comment and this seemed
to break the ice because a few minutes
later a high school teacher named Jason
Dyer posted a suggestion and a few
minutes after that another mathematician
named Terence Tao also a Fields medalist
posted an idea and things really started
to move quickly at this point over the
next 37 days
27 different people would post 800
substantive comments containing 170,000
words I was not a serious participant
but I
was following along closely from the
start and it was just amazing yeah the
speed with which an idea would be
tentatively proposed and then really
rapidly developed by other people and
improved sometimes discarded it was just
amazing gal was described the process as
being too ordinary research as driving
is to pushing a car at the end of the 37
days galas used his blog to announce
that they had solved the core problem in
fact they had solved a harder
generalization of the problem the
polymath project had succeeded so what
the polymath project suggests at least
to me is that we can use the Internet to
build tools that actually expand our
ability to solve the most challenging
intellectual problems or to put it
another way we can build tools which
actively amplify our collective
intelligence in much the same way as for
millennia we've used physical tools to
amplify our strengths okay so what I'd
like to talk about today or what I'd
like to explore today is what this means
for science it's much more important
than just solving a single mathematical
problem it means an expansion in the
range of scientific problems we can hope
to attack at all
it means potentially an acceleration in
the rate of scientific discovery means a
change in the way we construct knowledge
itself so before I get too overexcited
however I would I would like to talk
about some of the challenges some of the
problems particularly I'd like to
describe a failure of this approach so
it occurred in 2005 or started in 2005 a
grad student at Caltech named John
Stockton had a very good idea for what
he called the quantum wiki or quickie
for sure okay
it's a great idea what he did with the
quickie was the idea of the quickie was
that it was going to be a great
repository of human knowledge much like
Wikipedia but instead of being focused
on general knowledge it was going to be
focused on specialist knowledge in
quantum computing going to be kind of a
super textbook for the field with
information about all the latest
research about what the big open
problems in the field were people's
speculation about how to solve the
problems and so on like Wikipedia the
intention was that it would be written
by the users in this case by experts in
quantum computing I was present at the
conference at Caltech in 2005 when it
was announced and some of the people who
I spoke to were very skeptical but some
of the people were very excited by the
idea they were impressed by the
implementation they're impressed by the
amount of initial seed material which
had been put on the side and most of all
they were excited by the vision but just
because they're excited didn't mean that
they wanted to take the time themselves
to contribute they hoped that other
people would do so and in the end nobody
essentially was really all that
interested in contributing ok if you
look today except in a few small corners
the quickie is essentially dead it's sad
to say this is quite a common story many
scientists in fields ranging from
genetics to string theory have tried to
start science wikis along very similar
lines and typically they have failed for
essentially the same reason it's not
just science wiki's either inspired by
Facebook many organizations have tried
to create social networks for scientists
which will connect scientists to other
people with similar interests they so
they can share things like data or code
their ideas and so on again it sounds
like a good idea but if you join one of
these sides you'll quickly discover that
they're essentially empty their virtual
ghost towns so what's going on what's
the problem here why these promising
sites failing well imagine that you're
an ambitious young scientist Victor I
know some of you here are ambitious
young scientists imagine you're an
ambitious young scientist you really
would like to get a job a permanent job
a good job doing the work that you love
but it's incredibly competitive to get
such jobs often there'll be hundreds of
very highly qualified applicants
for positions and so you find yourself
working 60 70 80 hours a week doing the
one thing that you know will get you
such a job and that is writing
scientific papers you may think that the
quickie is a wonderful idea in principle
but you also know that writing a single
mediocre paper will do much more for
your career and your job prospects than
a long series of brilliant contributions
to such a site so even though you may
like the idea you may think it will
advance science more quickly you find
you just can't conceive of it as being
part of your job it's not the only
things which can succeed in this kind of
environment are projects like the
polymath project which even though they
employ an unconventional means to an end
they have an essential conservatism
about them the end product of the
polymath project was still a scientific
paper effective with several papers
right so unconventional means but
conventional ends so there's a kind of
conservatism about it and don't get me
wrong the playmat project is terrific
but it is a pity that scientists can
only use tools which have this kind of
conservative nature so let me tell you a
story about an instance where we moved
away from this conservatism so it's a
rare story whether the conservatism has
been broken it occurred in the 1990s
when as you know for the first time
biologists were taking large amounts of
genetic data particularly in the human
genome project and there were sites
online which would allow biologists to
upload that data so it could be shared
with other people around the world and
analyzed by other people it probably the
best-known of these is the site GenBank
which some of you may have heard of or
used and these sites like GenBank had
the problem in common with the quickie
that scientists they're not paid or
rewarded for sharing their data it's all
about publishing papers and so there was
a considerable reluctance to actually
upload the data everybody could see that
this was silly but it was obvious that
this was the right thing to do but just
because it was obvious didn't mean that
people were actually doing it and so a
meeting was convened in Bermuda in 1996
of many of the world's leading molecular
biologists and they said and they
discussed the problem for several days
and they came up with what are now
called the Bermuda principles which
state that first once human genetic data
is taken in the lab it should be
immediately uploaded to a site like
GenBank and to that the data would be in
the public domain and these principles
were given teeth because they were taken
by the big scientific ground agencies
the US National Institutes of Health the
UK Wellcome Trust and actually baked
into policy okay so it meant that if you
were a scientist you want to work on the
human genome you had to agree to abide
by these principles and today I'm very
pleased to say as a result you can go
online anybody here and download the
human genome so that's a terrific story
but the human genome is just a tiny tiny
fraction of all scientific knowledge
right even just in other parts of
genetics there is so much knowledge that
is still locked up I spoke with one
bioinformatician who told me that he'd
been quote sitting on the genome of an
entire species for more than a year an
entire species and in other parts of
science it is routine that scientists
hoard their data they hoard the computer
code that they write that could be
useful potentially to other people they
hoard their best ideas and they often
hoard even the descriptions of the
problems that they think are most
interesting and so what I and other
people in the open science movement
would like to do is we'd like to change
this situation we would like to change
the culture of science so that
scientists become much more strongly
motivated to share all of these
different kinds of knowledge we want to
change the values of individual
scientists so that they start to see it
as part of their job to be sharing their
data to be sharing their code to be
sharing their best ideas and their
problems
so you know if if we can do this then it
this kind of change in values then we
will indeed start to seize individual
scientists rewarded for doing these
things there will be incentives to do
them it's a difficult thing to do
however you know we're talking about
changing the culture of entire large
parts of science but it has happened
before once in history right back at the
dawn of science Galileo
1609 he points his telescope up at the
sky towards Saturn and he sees for the
first time in history what we now know
are the rings of Saturn does he tell
everybody in the world
no he doesn't do that he writes down a
description privately and then he
scrambles the letters in the description
into an anagram and he sends that
anagram to several of his astronomer
rivals and what this ensures what this
ensures is that if they later make the
same discovery he can reveal the anagram
and get the credit but in the meantime
he hasn't given up any knowledge at all
and I'm sad to say that he was not
uncommon at the time
Newton Huygens Hooke Leonardo they all
used similar devices okay
the printing press had been around for a
hundred and fifty years by this time and
yet there was a great battle in the 17th
and 18th centuries to change the culture
of science so that it became expected
that when a scientist made a discovery
they would reveal it in a journal now
that's great that that change has
happened it's terrific
but today we have new technologies we
have new opportunities to share our
knowledge in new ways and the ability to
create tools that actually allow us to
solve problems in entirely new ways so
we need to have a second open science
revolution it is my belief that any
publicly funded science should be open
science how can we achieve this change
well if you're a scientist and I know
many of you are not scientists but if
you are a scientist then there are
things that you can do you can get
involved in an open science project even
if it's just for a small fraction of
your time you can find forums online
where you can share your knowledge in
new ways ways that allow other people to
build on that knowledge you can also if
you're more ambitious start an open
science project of your own if you're
really bold you may wish to experiment
with entirely new ways of collaborating
in much the same way as the polymath
project did but above all what you
should do is be very generous in giving
credit to those of your colleagues who
are practicing science in the open and
to promote their work is only
conservative scientific values that look
down on these activities the sharing of
data the blogging or using of wikis and
so on you can reject those conservative
values and engage your scientific
colleagues in conversation to promote
the value of these new ways of working
to emphasize that it takes bravery to do
these things particularly by young
scientists it's through such
conversation that the culture of science
can be changed so if you are not a
scientist there are also things that you
can do my belief is that the single most
important thing that we can do to give
impetus to open science is create a
general awareness amongst the population
of the issue of open science and of its
critical importance if there is that
general awareness then the scientific
community will inevitably find it will
be dragged by the population at large in
the right direction and there are simple
things you can do you can talk to your
friends and acquaintances who are
scientists just ask them what are they
doing to work more openly or you can use
your imagination and your personal power
to raise awareness in other ways we're
talking about changing not just what
scientists do but what grant agencies do
what universities do
and what governments do and you can
influence all of those things our
society faces a fundamental question
what kinds of knowledge are we going to
expect and incentivize our scientists to
share will we continue as we have done
in the past or will we embrace new kinds
of sharing which lead to new methods for
solving problems and an acceleration in
the process of science entirely across
the broad my hope is that we will
embrace open science and really seize
this opportunity that we have to
reinvent discovery itself thank you
you